---
layout: post
title: "Many things in science are obsolete; trying to set one new standard will have it soon be so as well (a comment on _The Scientific Paper Is Obsolete_)"
date: 2018-04-09
---

## [> {{ page.title }}](https://caesoma.github.io/archive/standalone/2018-04-09-not-just-the-scientific-paper-is-obsolete)

The _scientific paper_ -- the actual form of it -- is to this day used by researchers to communicate results, despite being essentially the same as the paper version created 400 years ago, and that is limiting in a world where communication has evolved into a plethora of digital channels in all shapes and formats. The "notebook" is an interactive, digital replacement that could circumvent essentially all limitations for a piece of paper (or a _pdf_ file). That is what is argued in a [piece in The Atlantic](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/04/the-scientific-paper-is-obsolete/556676/).

As a scientists myself I think many scientific practices and tools are obsolete, but I don't think one standard of communicating science is needed any more than a standard for anything else -- diversity and ability to integrate all kinds of scientific inputs and outputs are better approaches; many scientists think that way already (that doesn't make it easy at all, either).
The piece is less about the obsolescence of the _paper_ and more about the virtues of the _notebook_; it also conflates some of its issues with the crisis of reproducibility of science -- most biological and medical research is still analyzed with correlations, linear regression and ANOVA, (or worst, statisticsless plots, some are even [bars!](http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.1002128&fullSite)) and people are lucky if the researchers understand the methods they are using. Sloppily written software, another culprit called out in the piece, is of course worse than solid software, but people who understand statistical methods enough to write their own software are probably more part of solution than of the problem, at least in what concerns the analyses.

There is no arguing that the _paper_ has many flaws: it is not interactive, it rarely describes all the details necessary to reproduce all the results, it has limited space, and it is often dry and boring (even when in concise form and without the raw data). But today the _paper_ does not exist to fulfill these roles, it is more of a summary of years of research -- to "tell a story", as many people put it -- and most scientists know that really learning something takes much more than reading a methods section. I heard a prominent pioneer of open access say we need to stop the myth that people read _papers_; I agree, most papers exist only to show the results, many are pretty bad at it, and then they have the other sections because they have to. That is even more amplified in glamour journals, which are often more like sensationalist tabloids descriptions of the actual research undergone.
[Is the scientific paper fraudulent?])(http://blog.thegrandlocus.com/static/misc/is_the_scientific_paper_fraudulent.pdf ), Peter Medawar asked over 50 years ago; and already then he answered in the positive.
That doesn't mean the _paper_ is useless, but it is probably more of a by-product of all the things that are wrong in science (like in the world), than the cause of the trouble.

The _notebook_ does not solve all those issues either, even if the work is mostly computational.
It was also suggested more than once that scientific communication should be [more like GitHub](http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2017/04/we_need_a_github_for_academic_research.html), but anyone who takes that at face value as a solution probably understand neither GitHub nor scientific publishing.
More comprehensive ways of describing scientific work are always welcome (that is why I spend time on [my own page](https://caesoma.github.io/), so I can describe what is not on the papers, and give nitty gritty details of things I may have struggled with myself -- which are formally in the paper and references therein, but require a lot of work to go through and actually get things going).
I have used notebooks extensively at one time or another, from _Mathematica_, to _IPython_, through [Sage](http://www.sagemath.org/) and [Maxima](http://maxima.sourceforge.net/index.html), and I think they can be very useful for interactive work as well as presentation purposes, but not necessarily for standalone communication any more than some well-commented Python code could be. Maybe it is other scientists' preferred method of writing or reading research, which is fine, but it may also be worse than the paper in some cases, so why try to replace it entirely?

The [Atlantic piece](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/04/the-scientific-paper-is-obsolete/556676/) is correct in all the things the _paper_ is not, and in some things the _notebook_ is, but as the frontier of human knowledge science is extremely complex, and the form of the communication of its results is only one of many fronts (albeit an important one) where problems arise. Within there are issues of access to the publications and results, reproducibility based on published methods, and sustainability of the publication system. Beyond that there are other large fronts like science funding, and the actual research activity being probably the main one.
Many of these are probably static for way more than 400 years; the _paper_ is not the only thing that needs urgent rethinking, but it just may be a good place to start, anyway.
